Austin H. canГўВҖВҷt wait to buy a house and start a family. But right now, the 34-year-old is barely getting by. Austin is living paycheck to paycheck and saving almost no money, one of the millions of Americans struggling to make ends meet in an increasingly unaffordable economy. Worse, the family-owned construction business he works at is shutting down. ГўВҖВңI am going to be unemployed in the next month or two ГўВҖВ“ with no safety net,ГўВҖВқ said Austin, who declined to share his last name. An estimated 24% of US households are living paycheck to paycheck so far in 2025, according to a Bank of America Institute analysis released this week. The bankГўВҖВҷs researchers combed through internal data on its tens of millions of consumers and tracked how much income customers spent on necessities like housing, gasoline, groceries, child care and utilities. They found that 24% of households spend over 95% of their income on those necessities, leaving little to nothing left over for the ГўВҖВңnice-to-haveГўВҖВқ things like going out to dinner or taking a vacation, let alone saving. No margin for error Austin, who has a masterГўВҖВҷs degree in fine arts, said heГўВҖВҷs applied to roughly 1,000 jobs over the past year ГўВҖВ“ everything from teaching to construction ГўВҖВ“ with no luck. ГўВҖВңTo be 34 and living paycheck to paycheck with no savings, things are pretty crappy right now,ГўВҖВқ he said. Austin is supporting his partner, a veterinary student, and worries about how the two of them will pay off his student debt on top of all their other expenses. ГўВҖВңWe want to own a house and start a family, but I donГўВҖВҷt know how we will ever get our feet under ourselves,ГўВҖВқ he said. ГўВҖВҳLiving in two different worldsГўВҖВҷ The Bank of America report is evidence of the K-shaped economy, where affluent Americans are faring far better than those at the bottom. Many are struggling to get by, even as President Donald Trump dismisses affordability concerns as a ГўВҖВңcon jobГўВҖВқ conjured up by Democrats based on ГўВҖВңfakeГўВҖВқ polls. But the rate of increase in households living paycheck to paycheck has slowed significantly this year, and while there is little change this year for middle- and high-income households, the share of lower-income households living paycheck to paycheck has jumped from 27% in 2023 to 29%, according to Bank of America. ГўВҖВңHigher income and lower income households are living in two different worlds,ГўВҖВқ Joe Wadford, economist at the Bank of America Institute, told CNN. A growing wage gap The problem is that paychecks among lower-income households are often not keeping up with prices ГўВҖВ“ especially now that inflation has reaccelerated. After-tax wages increased about 2% in October year over year among middle-income consumers, Bank of America found. ThatГўВҖВҷs below the 3% inflation rate as of September. Wage growth for lower-income Americans is falling even further behind. Their after-tax wages increased just 1% year-over-year. By contrast, high-income wages jumped 4%, safely outpacing the increase in the cost of living. Wadford said the wage growth gap between high- and low-income Americans hasnГўВҖВҷt been this high since 2016. ГўВҖВҳWeГўВҖВҷre getting nowhereГўВҖВҷ For Millennials like Austin, that gap is even bigger. Wages have inched up just 1% for low-income Millennials, compared with 6% for high-income. ГўВҖВңWe work full-time and have degrees. And weГўВҖВҷre getting nowhere,ГўВҖВқ Austin said. Gregory Daco, chief economist at EY-Parthenon, said the large number of households living paycheck to paycheck underscores the ГўВҖВңdeepening affordability crisisГўВҖВқ caused by five years of price hikes that have outpaced income gains. For the broader economy, the risk is that many families struggling to get by and worried about their jobs opt to spend much more cautiously. ГўВҖВңThis could weaken the foundation of a consumer-driven economy,ГўВҖВқ Daco said. ThatГўВҖВҷs especially true if layoffs gather steam in what had been a no-fire, no-hire job market. Goldman Sachs economists warned in a recent research report of a growing ГўВҖВңrisk of labor market deterioration.ГўВҖВқ The Wall Street bank estimates there is a 20% to 25% chance that the US unemployment rate jumps by at least 0.5 percentage points in the next six months. ThatГўВҖВҷs up from just a 10% chance as of six months ago. Subprime auto loan troubles Some Americans are falling behind on their bills ГўВҖВ“ especially those with low credit scores. The percentage of subprime borrowers who are at least 60 days late on their car loans climbed to 6.65% in October, according to Fitch Ratings. That is the highest since Fitch tracking began in the early 1990s, surpassing the prior peak set in January and well above levels during the Great Financial Crisis. This trend is a clear sign of financial distress, especially since car loans are historically the last payment Americans are willing to miss. Bank of America has found that the number of households making just the minimum payment on their credit card is also rising, though so is the share of credit card users paying off their entire balance each month. ГўВҖВңThere is a mixed bag. There are some signs of consumer health, and yet, within the minority of people experiencing financial stress, pressure is mounting,ГўВҖВқ said Wadford, the Bank of America economist. Vanessa Jones, a 65-year-old grandmother living in Davenport, Iowa, took on a second nursing job two years ago because she couldnГўВҖВҷt make ends meet. ГўВҖВңThe cost of living is way too high. My savings have been depleted. I havenГўВҖВҷt tapped into my retirement, but that looks like the next step,ГўВҖВқ she said. Jones, the primary caregiver for her two grandchildren, was recently diagnosed with cancer and wound up with ГўВҖВңastronomicalГўВҖВқ medical bills. Facing $85,000 in medical debt, she filed for bankruptcy. Jones pushed back on politicians arguing there is no affordability crisis. ГўВҖВңThe people claiming prices are lower are not actually buying their own groceries or trying to find the cheapest place to get their car fixed,ГўВҖВқ she said. ГўВҖВңThey need to walk in our shoes.ГўВҖВқ