---WORKED EXAMPLES---

EXAMPLE 1 - News article with loaded author language (Left):
Article: "Trump Names A Baffling New Enemy In Latest Unhinged All-Caps Rant. The former president launched a strange new attack on an unexpected group. Donald Trump has found another enemy, and this one might be his most mysterious choice of villain yet. The former president fired off an all-caps post on his flailing Truth Social website..."
Excluded as quoted: "he loves poppies, but eats cats for breakfast"
{"rating": -7, "lean": "Left", "explanation": "This is a news report. The author's prose is saturated with dismissive language targeting a single political figure, with no equivalent framing applied elsewhere in the piece. The density and consistency of this language supports a Left rating. Detailed Analysis: (1) The author describes the subject's post as an 'unhinged,' 'all-caps rant' and calls him 'strange' and 'baffling' — these are the author's own characterizations, not quotations, and they mock rather than describe; (2) The headline frames the subject as erratic and villainous before the article begins, with 'Unhinged,' 'Rant,' and 'villain' all appearing in the author's own words; (3) The author describes the subject's platform as 'flailing,' an editorial judgment about its relevance or success that goes beyond neutral description; (4) No neutral or counterbalancing characterization of the subject appears anywhere in the piece."}

EXAMPLE 2 - Opinion piece with clear right-leaning ideology (Right):
Article: "I was recently having a conversation with two friends about our shared dread over the upcoming election cycle... If we conservatives can reject several major political trends of the past eight years and return to Tea Party principles... Our real problem in conservative politics is that we don't engage in the important fights as the institutional left does..."
Excluded as quoted: "Trump was very good. But the results since 2016 suggest America has soured on him. So if he loses the general, what does it matter how good he'd have been if he'd have won? Going back to the Tea Party, the GOP has often acted like they'd rather lose with their first choice than win with their second choice."
{"rating": 6, "lean": "Right", "explanation": "This is an opinion piece with unambiguously right-leaning ideas expressed throughout. The author advocates for a specific conservative ideological direction and casts the left as an institutional adversary. The consistency and clarity of right-leaning ideas throughout warrants a strong Right classification. Detailed Analysis: (1) The author explicitly argues in their own voice for a return to Tea Party conservatism as the correct path forward for the right; (2) Democrats and the institutional left are framed throughout as opponents the right must learn to fight more effectively; (3) The author promotes a conservative electoral realignment agenda directly, not through sources; (4) The piece is written from an explicit insider conservative perspective with no attempt at neutrality or balance anywhere in the author's own prose."}

EXAMPLE 3 - Article dominated by quoted panel discussion (evaluate author framing only):
Article: "A CNN panel is ripping Republican vice presidential nominee Sen. J.D. Vance (R-Ohio) for making a walk to Vice President Kamala Harris' plane while they were at the same airport. On Thursday morning CNN's Kasie Hunt noted the moment, saying, [quoted panel discussion follows]... Finally, Finney said the moment was 'immature' and 'so childish.'"
Excluded as quoted: All panel member statements -- "This was a rather, shall we say, awkward moment...", "I'm never going to question...", "Yeah, and we'll never know...", "There are like eight states...", "I would warn the Trump campaign...", "It does feel a little uncomfortable.", "Yes, it gets real creepy real quick...", "And also, like, what was his vision?", "immature", "so childish.", "It's just disgraceful."
{"rating": -2.5, "lean": "Lean Left", "explanation": "This is a news report where the author's own prose is minimal — the piece is primarily a transcript of panel commentary. The limited original language tilts against the Republican subject, though no leftist ideology appears. Two directional word choices in an otherwise transcript-driven piece place the rating at Lean Left. Detailed Analysis: (1) The author describes the panel as 'ripping' Vance rather than using a neutral verb like 'discussing' or 'questioning,' framing the criticism as forceful and legitimate; (2) The author characterizes Vance's action as a 'stunt' in their own voice, a dismissive description rather than a neutral one; (3) No balancing or neutral language appears anywhere in the author's own prose."}

EXAMPLE 4 - News article with structural bias accumulation (Left):
Article: A news report on a Republican immigration enforcement action opens with humanizing details about the detained individual (described gardening, cooking tutorials, community volunteering), features four polls showing 53-64% opposition to related policies in prominent positions, notes that the CBO projects large deficit increases while burying the Republican rebuttal in a dependent clause, and closes with an attorney quote framing the outcome as a privilege issue. The government's enforcement rationale appears only briefly, attributed to a spokesperson.
{"rating": -3, "lean": "Left", "explanation": "This is a news report. No explicit ideological language appears in the author's prose, but five consistent structural and editorial choices favor a sympathetic view of the detained individual while casting skepticism on enforcement. The accumulation here warrants a Left classification. Detailed Analysis: (1) The piece opens with personal details about the detained individual — gardening, cooking tutorials, community volunteering — establishing emotional framing before any policy context is provided; (2) Four opposition-heavy polls are featured prominently while no equivalent supportive data appears anywhere in the piece; (3) CBO deficit projections are foregrounded in the author's own voice while the Republican rebuttal is buried in a dependent clause; (4) Section headers use attack metaphors such as 'In The Crosshairs,' characterizing enforcement as aggression rather than policy; (5) The final word is given to a source framing the outcome as contingent on privilege, leaving the reader with a skeptical impression of the enforcement action."}

---Article to analyze is below:
