The ongoing government shutdown isnГўВҖВҷt just the longest in American history. ItГўВҖВҷs likely the most damaging, too. Historically, the economic damage from shutdowns is fleeting, quickly reversing when the government reopens. However, the 36-day lapse in funding that began on October 1 is already dealing a significant ГўВҖВ“ albeit temporary ГўВҖВ“ blow to the worldГўВҖВҷs largest economy. Millions of Americans are not getting food stamp benefits needed to feed their families. Roughly 1.4 million federal employees havenГўВҖВҷt been paid ГўВҖВ“ even though many are still working. And investors and policymakers are in the dark about whatГўВҖВҷs happening in the US economy because the release of government data has stalled. ГўВҖВңThe current shutdown looks likely to have the greatest economic impact of any shutdown on record,ГўВҖВқ Alec Phillips, chief political economist at Goldman Sachs, wrote in a recent report. Related article The longer the US government shutdown continues, the more the economic risks increase, economists say. Photo Illustration by Ian Berry/CNN/Adobe Stock As the shutdown drags on, hereГўВҖВҷs how it can drag down the economy Even if the shutdown ends by next week, it will likely slow down the growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) ГўВҖВ” the broadest measure of economic output, without considering inflation ГўВҖВ” by 1.15 percentage points during the fourth quarter, according to Goldman Sachs. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office estimates the shutdown will reduce GDP by one to two percentage points. ГўВҖВңThose effects will intensify the longer the shutdown lasts,ГўВҖВқ the CBO wrote in a letter last week. Although ГўВҖВңmost of that declineГўВҖВқ will eventually be recovered, CBO estimates between $7 billion and $14 billion will be permanently lost during the shutdown. In 2025, a ГўВҖВҳmuch greater hitГўВҖВҷ to US economy Goldman Sachs is now penciling in weaker fourth-quarter GDP growth of just 1%. That would represent a significant slowdown from the 3% or even 4% growth that was projected for the third quarter. Phillips wrote that the current shutdown is expected to result in a ГўВҖВңmuch greater hit to growth than any prior shutdownГўВҖВқ because itГўВҖВҷs the longest on record and is much broader than previous shutdowns. The 2018-2019 shutdown, previously the longest on record at 35 days, was only a partial shutdown, impacting just 10% of government spending, according to Goldman Sachs. The 2025 shutdown, by comparison, has derailed 100% of appropriations. The current shutdown also comes at a bad time, said David Kelly, chief global strategist at JPMorgan Asset Management: ГўВҖВңThe economy was already going to slow down, and this just made it worse.ГўВҖВқ Kelly cited a range of factors slowing the economy in the fourth quarter, including historically high tariffs, low immigration and the return of student debt payments. He added that itГўВҖВҷs ГўВҖВңshockingГўВҖВқ to see ГўВҖВңhow much public pain (Democrats and Republicans) are willing to inflict just to get a political gain.ГўВҖВқ On Saturday, millions of SNAP recipients started missing their benefits due to the government shutdown. Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images Economic data blackout The precise economic damage from the shutdown is difficult to measure, in part because of the information blackout caused by the shutdown itself. ГўВҖВңWe are flying blind in this economy,ГўВҖВқ Kelly said. Only one major economic report has been released by the federal government during the shutdown: the September consumer price index (CPI), the final piece of data required to determine annual cost of living adjustments for Social Security benefits. Other data releases, including the all-important monthly jobs report and the FedГўВҖВҷs go-to inflation metric as well as key insights on consumer spending, have been sidelined. ThatГўВҖВҷs a major shift from the 2018-2019 shutdown, when the Bureau of Labor Statistics still received funding. That allowed the agency to continue collecting and releasing key economic data. Policymakers have been forced to make decisions with limited information. Last week, for the first time ever, the Federal Reserve decided on interest rates without the monthly jobs report. Related article Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell at the Federal Reserve on September 17. Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images The shutdown is complicating the FedГўВҖВҷs ability to help the economy If the government shutdown continues to limit Fed officialsГўВҖВҷ visibility, it could persuade the central bank to forgo cutting rates at the December policy meeting. ГўВҖВңWhat do you do if youГўВҖВҷre driving in the fog? You slow down,ГўВҖВқ Fed Chair Jerome Powell said during a press conference last week. ГўВҖВңIГўВҖВҷm not committing to that, IГўВҖВҷm just saying itГўВҖВҷs certainly a possible that you would say, ГўВҖВҳWe really canГўВҖВҷt see, so letГўВҖВҷs slow down.ГўВҖВҷГўВҖВқ Even after the government reopens, the quality of economic data could be eroded by the fact the BLS was unable to conduct critical surveys of businesses and consumers during the shutdown period. The shutdown will also likely inflate the unemployment rate for the month of October because the BLS typically counts furloughed workers as unemployed unless they find work elsewhere. Related article Tee Tran, owner of Monster Pho in Oakland, California, remembers his own mother working five jobs when he was a child to help keep their family fed. Courtesy Thuyen Tran How to help SNAP recipients as the shutdown drags on A bounce-back in 2026? The good news is most of the shutdown-induced damage to the economy is expected to quickly unwind after the government reopens. Goldman Sachs expects the shutdown effect to ГўВҖВңmore than reverseГўВҖВқ in the first quarter, boosting GDP by 1.3 percentage points as furloughed workers return and delayed federal spending recovers. The bank expects that reversal to lift first-quarter GDP growth to a solid pace of 3.1%. The CBO estimated that some of the output lost due to employee furloughs would be permanently lost, costing the economy up to 14 billion in an eight-week shutdown. Of course, those forecasts for a rebound hinge on a key element of shutdowns: Federal workers are repaid once the government reopens. However, President Donald Trump has questioned the policy of paying furloughed workers ГўВҖВ“ despite signing a law during his first term that has been widely interpreted as guaranteeing back pay for furloughed workers. The White House on Tuesday would not commit to paying furloughed workers at the end of the shutdown, raising the risk of lasting economic damage. CNNГўВҖВҷs Tami Luhby contributed reporting.