On Jan. 1, every worker and employer in Minnesota will start paying into a brand-new state-run Minnesota Paid Leave program. Not only is it likely the largest labor mandate in a generation, but it is also one of the largest tax increases in state history at roughly $1.6 billion annually, funded through a new payroll tax split between employers and employees.For many Minnesotans, paid time off to bond with a newborn, recover from surgery, or care for a loved one is a necessity. In response to a changing labor market, more than 80% of Minnesota workers currently have access to paid leave through their jobs, in many cases at no cost to the employee. ADVERTISEMENT Now, a top-down mandate from the state will steamroll that progress by forcing every employer, from a 10-person bakery to a small nonprofit, to the biggest companies in Minnesota, to follow the exact same rigid rules. Dave BakerContributed / Minnesota Legislature For small businesses, this isn’t just a policy shift, it’s a serious challenge. If two people are out in a 10-person shop, that’s 20% of the workforce gone for weeks at a time. The rest of the team has to pick up the slack, and finding temporary work isn’t as simple as it sounds. By the time someone’s trained, they might be gone, too. It turns into a constant scramble, and for a lot of small employers, that’s just not sustainable.This sweeping mandate does not just apply to private companies. Cities, counties, and public unions, many of which already provide generous paid leave through long-standing collective bargaining agreements, will now be doubling up on benefits. This mandate not only takes a valuable negotiating tool away from public sector unions, but it also means that taxpayers will face higher property taxes to cover the added costs to city and county budgets.For our cash-strapped public schools, this is yet another unfunded mandate that will create serious problems for districts. The law explicitly denies school districts from levying to cover the payroll costs of the new program. That means that the entire employer share of the tax will have to come from existing school budgets.Further, unlike unemployment insurance, the state’s new paid leave program will not have a federal backstop. That means that if claims outpace funding — and it’s hard to imagine they won’t — the only option will be to raise payroll taxes higher. These concerns started playing out last winter, when the tax rate jumped by 25%, a full year before the program even goes into effect.Workers deserve to be able to take time off when they need it most. We all agree on that. My concern is grounded in the program’s feasibility. When the enacting legislation was passed in 2023, there was no bipartisan input and no real attempt to meet in the middle.Our communities are already struggling with staffing shortages in public schools, the health care sector, and in so many other important industries. What happens when more employees are out longer, and we can’t fill the jobs left behind? What happens when small businesses already on the edge must choose between growing or simply staying afloat? ADVERTISEMENT More Commentary: Columns Cal Thomas: No Kings? They really have no clue... From the commentary, "If you paid attention to the language used by some Democrats who spoke to the protesters, it was mostly a re-run of that party's grievances, including the tired claim that the Trump tax cuts benefit only "the rich" and that the president is a "dictator." " 1d ago · By Cal Thomas Columns F. Willis Johnson: Why the fight over Jimmy Kimmel matters for us all From the commentary, "The next time a comedian is silenced, or a cleric threatened, or an activist marginalized, we would do well to remember the lesson of this moment: Free speech is not a luxury. It is the lifeblood of everything else." 1d ago · By F. Willis Johnson / The Fulcrum Columns Dad's closet: The source for all your last-minute costume ideas The average consumer spends a lot more money on Halloween than me. The $13 billion industry is expected to break records in consumer spending in 2025. My kids have not yet decided what to wear. 2d ago · By Michael Johnson Load More Given the Walz administration’s track record with waste, fraud and abuse in other public programs, it’s fair to ask: Will there be enough oversight to catch fraud in a program of this size? Right now, that’s far from clear.Minnesota employers aren’t the “bad guys.” The vast majority have been offering paid leave because it’s the right thing to do and because it helps attract and retain good employees. But this law doesn’t build on that progress. It steamrolls it.Six months from now, we’ll start seeing the effects. And I don’t think it’s going to look like progress.