Energy Liberal Billionaire-Backed Group Supercharging Global Green Energy Push (Photo by David Ryder via Getty Images) Audrey Streb DCNF Energy Reporter September 22, 2025 12:42 PM ET September 22, 2025 12:42 PM ET Audrey Streb DCNF Energy Reporter Font Size: A green energy coalition tied to billionaire-backed outfits such as the Bezos Earth Fund and the Rockefeller Foundation was preparing to funnel another $7.5 billion into global projects, Reuters reported on Monday. The Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet (GEAPP) was launched in 2021 and has worked to help electrify grids, building out battery storage systems and creating green energy jobs across impoverished regions in Africa, Latin America and other nations, according to its website. GEAPP Chief Executive Woochong Um told Reuters that the group is gearing up to invest around $7.5 billion as part of their five-year plan, though some of the group’s work is reportedly more difficult in the wake of the Trump administration leading a shift away from climate funding and foreign aid, according to the publication.“Climate alarmism is a hoax, and wind and solar energy are pointlessly expensive. But if billionaires like Jeff Bezos want to spend their own money virtue signaling on climate, they may certainly do what they wish,” Steve Milloy, senior fellow at the Energy and Environment Legal Institute told the Daily Caller News Foundation. “But if they really want to help mankind, there are many more and better ways to spend $7.5 billion to achieve actual philanthropic progress.” (RELATED: American Billionaires Bankrolled Activist Crusade Against Natural Gas Hubs Before Biden Signed Off On Approval Pause) View of the facade of the newly renamed COP30 hotel, located in the city center of Belem, state of Para, Brazil, on August 25, 2025. (Photo by ANDERSON COELHO/AFP via Getty Images) GEAPP lists the Bezos Earth Fund, the IKEA Foundation and The Rockefeller Foundation as its “anchor partners” on its website. “GEAPP’s Anchor Partners provide the Alliance with risk-tolerant grant capital, set the strategic vision, and use their deep experience in philanthropy to help ensure consistent progress toward our goals,” the group’s website states. GEAPP acquires free or cheap money from charitable organizations or government sources to minimize investment risk to draw in more support from the private sector and financial institutions, though this has been complicated by the shifting investment landscape under President Donald Trump, according to Reuters. The group plans to raise $500 million between 2026 and 2030 and leverage it about 15 times to open another $7.5 billion, Um told Reuters. “With aid budgets under pressure, we need new models to deliver development at scale,” Um told Reuters, noting that the alliance’s plans include “an Energy and Opportunity Coalition” to integrate green energy technologies into sectors like agriculture and healthcare. Composed of over 50 partners, GEAPP has helped to work on 137 projects in over 30 countries, with a substantial focus on battery storage systems, according to its website. Battery energy storage systems can be used to store electricity generated by solar panels or wind turbines for later use, according to the National Grid Group. Notably, battery energy storage systems have drawn controversy as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released the first federal safety guidance for the technology as some New York residents voiced their concerns over potential lithium-ion battery fires following recent severe cases. While the Biden administration pushed for battery storage systems and other green energy technologies like wind and solar as part of his climate agenda, the Trump administration has cut funding to several Biden-era energy programs and initiatives as it has moved to bolster other energy sources like coal and nuclear. GEAPP reportedly plans to ramp up its work in developing countries on what it calls “grids of the future,” or making sure power systems are primed for green energy technology and will release its five-year plan Monday, according to Reuters. GEAPP will be on the hunt for new partnerships during the upcoming major COP30 climate summit that will be held in Belém, Brazil, in November, Um told Reuters. GEAPP did not respond to the DCNF’s request for comment. All content created by the Daily Caller News Foundation, an independent and nonpartisan newswire service, is available without charge to any legitimate news publisher that can provide a large audience. All republished articles must include our logo, our reporter’s byline and their DCNF affiliation. For any questions about our guidelines or partnering with us, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org. Tags : gates foundation green energy jeff bezos liberals rockefeller family fund Scroll down for comments TRENDING 1 'Shut The F*ck Up': James Carville Tears Into Hunter Biden, Says 'He Was Guilty Of Some Sh*t' Media 2 'This Is Bullsh*t': Chris Cuomo Scolds Left-Wing Influencer For Saying Americans Should Get Guns To Use Against ICE Media 3 Jon Stewart Tells Kamala Harris Point-Blank He's Skeptical Of Her Main Excuse For Losing In 2024 Media 4 We Went Inside The Patriotic Ropes As Thousands Lined Up To See JD Vance, Erika Kirk Pick Up Charlie's Mantle Politics 5 Left's Anti-Trump Mania Makes Them Defend What They've Always Hated Most Opinion