#masthead-section-label, #masthead-bar-one { display: none }Jan. 6 PardonsWhat to KnowRioters Push for CompensationPardoned Rioters Attacked PoliceBroad View of PardonsA Day of RageAdvertisementSKIP ADVERTISEMENTSupported bySKIP ADVERTISEMENTPardoned Jan. 6 Rioter Sentenced to Life in Assassination PlotEdward Kelley had been convicted of plotting to kill the law enforcement officers who had investigated his case.Listen to this article · 3:32 min Learn moreShare full articleRioters at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.Credit...Kenny Holston for The New York TimesBy Alan FeuerJuly 3, 2025A Tennessee man pardoned by President Trump for taking part in the attack on the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, has been sentenced to life in prison for hatching a separate plot to assassinate the law enforcement officers who investigated his role in the riot.The life term imposed on the man, Edward Kelley, came during a hearing on Wednesday in Federal District Court in Knoxville, Tenn. Mr. Kelley was convicted at a trial there in November of charges that included conspiracy to murder federal employees and threatening federal agents.During the trial, prosecutors presented evidence that in 2022, while Mr. Kelley was at home facing charges in his Jan. 6-related case, he formed a group “that was preparing for armed conflict against the United States government” — specifically, the F.B.I. Mr. Kelley, a former Marine, had been deployed to both Iraq and Afghanistan.ImageEdward Kelley on Jan. 5, 2021. Credit...Department of JusticeHe made a list of nearly 40 people who had been involved in his arrest or who had helped to search his home as part of the Jan. 6 investigation, targeting them for assassination, prosecutors said. Mr. Kelley also planned to attack an F.B.I. office in Knoxville, prosecutors said, using improvised explosive devices attached to vehicles and drones.He was ultimately turned in by one of his co-conspirators who secretly recorded him.Just weeks before his conviction in Knoxville, Mr. Kelley was also found guilty of assault, civil disorder and obstruction of an official proceeding by a federal judge at a bench trial in Washington for his role in the Capitol attack.Prosecutors say he wore a gas mask and a tactical helmet when he showed up on Jan. 6 and scuffled with a Capitol Police officer, throwing him to the ground.Mr. Kelley then used a long piece of wood to shatter a window near the Senate Wing door, breaching the building, prosecutors say. After he got in, they said, he helped kick open a nearby door, allowing more members of the mob to enter the building.Before he was sentenced in that case, however, he was pardoned by Mr. Trump as part of the sweeping grant of clemency that the president gave to the nearly 1,600 people charged in connection with the Capitol attack.Mr. Kelley’s lawyers sought to have his assassination case thrown out as well, arguing that the crimes he was charged with had emerged from the investigation on Jan. 6 and thus were covered by Mr. Trump’s pardon.But Judge Thomas A. Varlan, who presided over the assassination case, rejected that argument, saying that the plot to murder law enforcement officers took place in Tennessee, not Washington, and unfolded well after the events of Jan. 6.In court papers filed to Judge Varlan last month, prosecutors said that Mr. Kelley had shown no remorse for his crimes and “continues to believe he was justified in targeting East Tennessee law enforcement for assassination.”The prosecutors told Judge Varlan that during a recorded phone call with an associate last November, while he was in jail awaiting trial, Mr. Kelley complained that he was being wrongfully prosecuted.“I’m here unjustly, man,” he said. “I’m a patriot, and I’m never ever going to apologize for trying to keep your family safe. Sometimes there’s casualties. I’m one of them.”Alan Feuer covers extremism and political violence for The Times, focusing on the criminal cases involving the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol and against former President Donald J. Trump. See more on: Donald TrumpShare full articleRelated ContentAdvertisementSKIP ADVERTISEMENT